- Welcome to another episode
of Falsehoods of Fitness.
Today we're gonna be talking
about central nervous system
fatigue,
or commonly referred to as CNS fatigue.
So, this was made popular,
the term was made popular
boy, I think in like
the late 80s, early 90s
by Arthur Jones.
And Arthur Jones is the
founder of Nautilis,
and then it was kinda kept popular by
a body builder named Mike Mentzer
and so what they were talking about was
how there's recovery of muscular tissue.
You know I can train my biceps and
how long does the actual
tissue take to recover.
But, then there's the
neurology associated with
activating that muscle
and there is such a thing
as the fatigue of the
central nervous system
in respect to when it wants to recruit
as much tissue as, let's say,
before an exercise session.
So, 'cause effort is very dependent but
maximum effort,
the idea was that there
was a certain amount of
time the central nervous
system doesn't want
to engage a certain amount of muscle and
it turns out that's true.
But in 2016, a lot of research came out
that shows that actually
cardiovascular exercise
has a longer window
of
time
that it takes to reactivate
to the same degree
some of these tissues called excitability,
and it turns out that
it wasn't what people
thought it was at all.
It wasn't days or weeks
that it takes.
It's really from a
cardiovascular perspective,
it's like thirty minutes.
So, and if you think
logically, that makes sense.
Like, if somebody does
heavy resistance exercise,
let's say they do heavy
squats or even to a more
exhausting degree, like X3 squats,
then they couldn't activate musculature if
they had to run up a flight of stairs or
something like that, they couldn't.
Or maybe they would lose their balance
because they can't fire
enough musculature.
So we know, and soreness
and the inability to
engage muscle are two
very different things.
So, do not confuse those two.
Different.
So,
when we look at
this, this
and Thomas in 2015, 2016
two different studies
really did a lot to
determine that
this cardiovascular exercise was more so
the accute changes in the inability to
to engage or the excitability of
of musculature.
But,
probably more to the point,
specifically when looking
at resistance training very,
single session heavy strength training
is what it was described by Latella
in 2016.
It looks at what it takes
to go to
central nervous system fatigue, and
then how long it takes
to recover from it so,
this is just something I
pulled out of the study
and you can see here's baseline and
this is after somebody
exercises, you can see
the excitability goes down so
baseline is like right where
central nervous system fatigue
is so, right after so
right, right sorta after the exercise,
you get about a 10 minute window
where you're not, you're not able to
really engage as much.
20 minute window, you're
right back to baseline.
30 minutes, you can activate,
you know, just as much.
Above, or at least you're
above the baseline and
then it shows an individual
right about 48 hours later,
there's another exercise session, and
they can engage to a much higher degree.
So, central nervous
system fatigue is a thing
but, it's not a thing that
anybody really needs to
worry about because
the actual tissue,
muscle protein synthesis,
is really the bigger issue
and we have a very good
understanding of that
now, with muscle biopsy studies.
Which is why we know 36
hours is really the window,
and after 36 hours,
you can train again now.
With the X3 protocol, we'd wait 48 hours
and that's, that's about it.
Now, when it comes to muscle damage
which I'll do another
Falsehoods of Fitness on
muscle damage and sorta like the idea that
you create micro tears, and micro tears
have to do with growth.
That is not true, either.
There's more micro tears
in musculature when
you run a marathon versus
your weight training session.
And guys who run marathons,
they're not growing any muscle.
So, it's got nothing to do with it, and
that will probably be the
next Falsehoods of Fitness.
Hope that was helpful
and you can find me or
people who can answer
your questions on the
X3 bar users group on Facebook.
Over 10 000 users there who
a lot of which can answer
some great questions.
There's also the X3 bar Facebook page and
the Dr. John Jaquish page on Facebook.
And then on Instagram, I'm at drjaquish.
Hope that helps.
See you soon.